| [home page](https://aburrou2.github.io/burroughs-portfolio/) | [king county in-class](KingCountyDemo)| [tableau demo in-class](TableauDemo)| [visualizing debt](dataviz2) | [critique by design](Assignment34) | [final project I](final-project-part-one) | [final project II](final-project-part-two) | [final project III](final-project-part-three) |

# The final data story

[Here](https://carnegiemellon.shorthandstories.com/declining-wic-participation-in-southwestern-pennsylvania/index.html#section-lGOEzMoZrn) is the published link to my final data story on Shorthand. I made significant changes to it that I will talk about more in the section below. I made a copy of what I turned in for Part 2 and made the changes in that new copy. I did that so I could easily compare the final product to the intermediate product and see the changes, growth, and how my thought process changed from one step to the next. 

# Changes made since Part II
The biggest changes I made to involved fleshing out the story more. I added more context throughout the story. The feedback I received made it clear that more context was needed throughout the story. It felt too much like a PowerPoint and not enough like a story. I also think that adding more text increased the presentation’s ability to stand on its own since most people looking at the story will not realistically see the final presentation. Additionally, the class audience did not see the whole story. It was important to add more context and flesh out the story more so if any of them were interested they could view my whole story and learn more. The goal of adding to my story was to include as much relevant information as possible so that someone curious about WIC would not need to go elsewhere to learn about the program. I also think that adding context helps lead my audience to the call to action. By adding more to the overall story, everything hopefully flows together better and the call to action is a more logical and natural ending point than before. 

Another big change I made was leading with the problem. I wanted the problem I was trying to solve be obvious at the start. I tried to do this by changing the title and making it allude more to the problem (declining WIC participation in the area). I also tried to reinforce the problem at the beginning by mentioning the problem again when I defined WIC, SW, and PA. Defining WIC, SW, and PA early were important since they are common abbreviations throughout the story and a misunderstanding on those abbreviations would be distracting to the story. 

In terms of specific context I added, I added more text at the beginning that explains who is eligible for WIC, how long they are eligible, and what makes someone eligible for WIC. Since my intended audience is people who know local mothers, infants, and/or children or may become a parent in the area in the future, it is important that they come away with knowledge on who is eligible for WIC. 

I also added more context around the charts. For each of the series of graphs, I wrote about some observations. I did this because I wanted the main takeaways to be obvious and I wanted the text to reinforce the main takeaways that are hopefully obvious from looking at the charts. 

It was apparent in my user research that people did not come away from my story thinking that funding being tied to participation was troublesome. I wanted that to be a main takeaway. I also think that point is crucial to my story, and wanted people to feel a sense of urgency because of that point. To make it more obvious, I improved the graphic with downward arrows and added more text next to the image to explain why exactly funding being tied to participation is troublesome. Building this out was important for the story to stand on its own and still have the main points obvious to someone viewing the story without me presenting it to them. 

Lastly, I added more context around the three components I think can increase WIC participation. I wanted audience members to know more about these components so that they would have less questions about what these services offer. Additionally, before talking about the three resources that people know less about, I thought it was important to briefly talk about the food packages that WIC offers participants. People usually know about the food aspect of WIC benefits, but it is still important to mention them if someone in the audience is brand new to learning about WIC. This whole section of the presentation builds off the earlier context that talks about who is eligible for WIC and how long they are eligible for. This section details how WIC supports families. I think adding this context here ties the story together. People should now know about who is eligible for WIC and what WIC offers to eligible individuals. That is all important information for this story and the story is more complete because it includes this information. 


## The audience

I still had the same audience in mind for the final story as I did in Part 2. The first is residents of Southwestern Pennsylvania, particularly people who know local mothers, infants, and/or children or may become a parent in the area in the future (i.e. people who live in Southwestern Pennsylvania that know mothers, infants, or children that could benefit from WIC). The second audience is policymakers who have a broader and more general reason to care about the issue. 

All the changes I made were with the audience in mind. I kept both the audience in the classroom in mind and an audience who would view my story without me presenting it to them. It was because of them that I made my call to action stronger and more actionable. Not only did I encourage the audience of people who know local mothers, infants, and/or children or may become a parent in the area in the future to spread awareness of WIC, but I also provided them with resources to find out more about the program or locate a nearby WIC clinic. I wanted the audience to come away with more information on WIC and to have resources as well. Before they just had information, but now I feel like they have resources and actionable things they can do to increase participation in the area (aside from spreading awareness). They also have easier access to resources that could personally help them or people they know. Coming into Part 3, I had a clear audience, but I needed to cater my presentation more to that audience. I did that by adding more context and making a more actionable call to action. 

## Final design decisions
I tried to make design decisions that would make the story seem more cohesive. I realized that many of the color decisions I made in Part 2 made the overall presentation seem choppy. The biggest design decision I made was sticking with a white background for the entire story. The idea of shifting to black from Part 2 was not a horrible idea, but I think it made it harder to present a Shorthand storyboard with a consistent theme. I also thought that it could be distracting if I used different backgrounds to the point where people stop would reading or listening and overthink the shift in background colors.

I also used the same colors throughout the story. The green and red used in the Flourish visuals and graphics I created on Canva use the same palettes of red and green. This is a minor change and it would likely to be hard to tell if they were different shades. I think it is important for the colors to be the same for a story to be truly cohesive and little changes like this are important to achieving that. Additionally, I realized from my user research that using red twice for the 41% and 59% image was confusing. Because of that, I used red and green to contrast between the two images. I think this worked out well and enhanced the contrast between the two images and added emphasis to the negative implications of 59% of eligible individuals not participating in WIC. 

I also used a more standard color gradient for the slope and bar charts. The women graphics used a purple scale, and the children graphics used a blue scale. The same colors were used for each category throughout the story. I realized that using a multi-color scale was confusing and could be distracting. Standardizing the colors to one color scale for each category was less confusing. I also made sure to use a consistent text color and size for the Flourish visuals. All axis labels used the same shade of grey and all labels, titles, and subtitles were the same size.  

I also realized that titles in nearly all the graphics or charts were not descriptive enough and I added titles or better titles to them to enhance their ability to stand on their own. The text for each chart or graphic was important for context, but I also wanted the title and sub-titles to be more informative and allude to the main idea. 

Another design decision I made was to present my slope and bar charts side-by-side instead of vertically. I think this alleviated the white space comment I received in user research and also made for an easier comparison between charts. I think having the charts side-by-side also reduces work for the audience. They can more easily compare these graphs when they are next to each other. There is now less eye travel for the audience. I also think the improved titles help them stand on their own. It is easier to compare the charts side-by-side since they are now less reliant on the still important contextual text that was previously to the left of the images (now this text is below the charts). 

Lastly, I wanted to make the call to action more aesthetically pleasing. This was something I noticed during the class presentations on Monday. The two presenters had aesthetically pleasing calls to action. Before this, my call to action was just text. Now it includes images and hyperlinks. Not only is it more actionable, but it is also more aesthetically pleasing. 


## References

My references for this project can be found at the bottom of Shorthand story which again is linked [here](https://carnegiemellon.shorthandstories.com/declining-wic-participation-in-southwestern-pennsylvania/index.html#group-section-TjwLB9wlDx). All the pictures used in the presentation are free, non-copyrighted images. Other graphics were created by me, and the information used to create those images is cited in the published story. 

The only additional comment I would like to add here pertains to the data cleaning I did for the section where I talked about 41% and 59% of eligible individuals. I got these numbers from five separate county reports and then entered them into a spreadsheet where I did aggregate calculations. The rest of my data in this presentation was cleaned by simply removing rows that did not contain information on Allegheny, Beaver, Butler, Washington, or Westmoreland County. 


# Final thoughts
There are a lot of things about the program that I left out that I could have added in an Appendix. I did not have enough time to flesh that out, but I do think my call to action helps fill that gap. It links to the Pennsylvania WIC program office website that contains the information I would have included if I had time. 

I thought about adding more information on health outcomes and the return on investment of WIC at the beginning of the presentation. I realize that this is not important to a person who may use WIC, but is more beneficial to a policymaker. Since policymakers were my secondary audience, including that information would have been appropriate. However, my call to action for policymakers was to promote aspects of the program, not the worthiness of WIC. In that regard, excluding return on investment information seems appropriate. 

I noticed that many people in class used Infogram in their final presentations. It looked like a cool tool to use and I wish I would have found a way to implement it into my presentation. I feel like I have a good list of free and easy to use resources for data visualization (e.g. Infogram, RawGraphs, and Flourish). I think the next step on my data visualization journey will involve using more powerful data visualization tools (e.g. Tableau) to help tell future data stories. I do not think I missed out by not using Tableau for this project. I think using Flourish was appropriate and enhanced my ability to tell a story with data. 

